[GS] New: Programming tutorial I (#43)
bitsandvolts/bitsandvolts.github.io: _posts/2023-01-04-gs_00007_programming_I.md

---
layout: single
title: Programming Tutorial I
category: Getting Started
permalink: /categories/getting_started/programming_tutorial_I
excerpt: "Why do we need programming languages?"
description:

>   First part of our programming tutorial. Why do we need programming languages?

Reviewer: Maybe "tutorial series" ?

author: Bjoern Hartmann
toc: true
toc_label: "Content"
toc_sticky: true
toc_icon: "align-justify"
sidebar:
  nav: "getting_started_0"
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/getting_started.jpg
---

Long time no see! We are finally back diving into the topic of programming
languages. Before we bring our hands to a first language, we want to talk about

> programming languages in general. Why do we need them? Why are there so many of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
programming languages in general. What are they, and why do we need them? Why are there so many of
```

them? What concepts do they share?

## Why do we need programming languages?

To answer this question, we need to talk about how a computer works. Don't
worry, the hardcore stuff will be explained in our category
[Digital Design](/categories/digital_design/). Here, we just need some basic
understanding. Let's start with a very fundamental question: What is a

> **program**? A program is a sequence of **instructions** that tells the computer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**program**? A program is essentially a sequence of **instructions** that tells the computer
```

what to do. Instructions can be very simple like an addition, but they also can
be rather complex by doing multiple things at the same time. Before we provide a
simple example we have to clarify the term **register**. In our first post, we
already talked about different memory types to store data: RAM, HDD, and SDD.

> Registers are another way to store data. They are the fastest memory type, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Registers are another way to store data, and are part of the processor. A register basically stores a single number. Registers are the fastest memory type our there, but
```

they are the most expensive ones at the same time. This is why most processors
have only a few of them.

Let's imagine we have a processor with two registers (r1, r2) and two supported

> instructions. One to load so-called **immediates** (=numbers) to a register (mv)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instructions. One to load so-called **immediates** (=numbers) into a register (called _mv_, for "move")
```

> instructions. One to load so-called **immediates** (=numbers) to a register (mv)

Reviewer: I think it's not necessary to use the term "immediate" here. It's just a beginners post, so maybe simply saying "to load a number/value into a register" would do it. What do you say?

> and one to add two registers (add). The so-called **Assembly Program**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and another one to add the values stored in two registers (_add_). Now, we can combine these instructions to create our first program:
```

(=programming language directly related to the hardware) could look like the
following:

    mv r1, 1
    mv r2, 2
    add r1, r2

> First, we load the immediates 1 and 2 to the registers r1 and r2. If we assume

Reviewer: "The above is an example of a so-called **Assembly program**. The **assembly language** is a programming language that consists of instructions which the processor can directly execute. In our example, we first load the values 1 and 2 into register..."

that the result of our addition is stored in the first register, r1 will contain
the value 3 at the end of our program. Cool, isn't it? But to be honest, we
skipped one step. As you might know, a computer does only understand 0's and
1's. Instructions like _mv_ or _add_ are already a human-readable form. Before

> you can run it, the **Assembler** has to convert it to machine code. Let's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can run it, a program called **Assembler** has to convert it to **machine code** (= 1s and 0s representation of the instructions). Let's
```

assume that _mv_ is converted to 1010, r1 is converted to 0010, and 1 is

> converted to 0001. Then, our first instruction would be 101000100001. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
converted to 0001. Then, our first instruction could look like this: 101000100001. This is
```

what a CPU can understand. Now, imagine a file full of 0's and 1's. Do you think
anyone is able to directly understand what the program does? No! It would be a
nightmare. That's the first reason, why we need programming languages:
**Readability**.

Let's think a bit further. Imagine that you spent hours writing your program and

> then you want to use it on a different processor. But on that new processor your

Reviewer: "But what if on that new processor the instructions and registers are different?"

And maybe briefly touch upon that there are different ISAs.

Author: Wouldn't that be too much detail? I mean to touch ISA

Reviewer: True. We can leave out the ISA point.

instructions and registers a different. This means that you have to rewrite your
code which is a lot of work! Trust us when we tell you that this is not feasible
in most cases. What you want to have is a programming language that is
independent of the underlying hardware. So-called **high-level** programming

> languages like _C_ or _Python_ are invented for this purpose. So, your second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
languages like _C_ or _Python_ were invented for this purpose. So, our second
```

> reason to use programming languages is **Compatability**.

Reviewer: Maybe add something like this:

"Compatibility. So, we write code in one of these higher-level programming languages, and there are tools (that we will cover below) which ensure that our program can run on most processors."

Author: what tools do you mean?

Author: I mean by tools

Reviewer: I meant compilers. How about "software tools"?

Lastly, each programming language is developed to **optimize** a specific use

> case. So, depending on what you want to do, you'll choose a different language.

Reviewer: An example might illustrate the point better:

"use case, say a video game vs. a scientific simulation"

But don't think that this is an easy choice. Discussions about which language
fits best can almost be religious. In the following section, we want to present
two general types of languages.

## Interpreted vs compiled languages

There exist hundreds of programming languages. But they all can be divided into
two groups: **interpreted** and **compiled** languages. When you followed our

> previous posts, then you already used an interpreter: your Linux shell. An

Reviewer: ```suggestion
previous posts, then you already used an _interpreter_: your Linux shell. An
```

> interpreter is a program itself that translates and executes commands one by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interpreter is a program itself that translates and executes commands given to it one by
```

one. So, a command such as _ls_ is converted into 0's and 1's and then executed
by the CPU. In contrast, compiled languages are _compiled_ (=converted) into
machine code (0's and 1's) once (usually) by the developer. This has to be done
once per supported machine. Because the user can execute the machine code

> directly, compiled languages are way faster. This will be enforced by several

Reviewer: "Because they are executed on the machine _directly_, compiled languages are usually way faster than their interpreted counterparts."

optimization steps of the **compiler**. We will talk about this in a later post.

> Interpreted languages, however, are more flexible. For example, you can change

Reviewer: Not sure if this applies to all interpreted languages.

```suggestion
Interpreted languages, however, are more flexible. For example, in some interpreted languages, you can change
```

> Interpreted languages, however, are more flexible. For example, you can change

Reviewer: Maybe give more advantages of interpreted ones, like faster to write code.
